This video is made possible by nod, VPN,
stop protecting your internet experience today. Go to nod
vpn.com/biographics and use the code biographics to get 70% off a three year
plan and an extra month for free protect yourself online today,
and let's get into it.
Venezuela. What do you think of when you hear that name?
We're guessing it something along the lines of crime, economic collapse,
and more crime,
a pen Petro dictatorship long rules by the United socialist party.
Venezuela has become a by word for a failing state yet not so long.
It was a rich, robust democracy. That was the envy of Latin America.
So how did we go from rich past to current crisis?
What was the bridge connecting these diametrically opposed?
Visions of Venezuela. The answer,
the larger than life personality of a single man,
Hugo Chavez was a once in a generation politician coming to power as a populist
outsider, running against, out of touch elites.
He managed to oversee a wholesale reform of Venezuela,
refashioning it in his own bombastic image. As president,
he instituted unprecedented spending gay freely to the poor halved poverty rates
and reduced mortality. At the same time though,
he turned what was once a functioning democracy into an autocratic vanity
project. One that was doomed to failure, a Robin hood to some,
a classic Latin American dictator to others. This is the life of Hugo Chavez.
The man who made modern Venezuela.
If you were inventing the background story for a socialist revolutionary,
you'd be hard pressed to come up with anything better than Hugo Chavez's actual
life born on the 28th of July, 1954 Chavez was the real deal,
a dirt poor kid in a house with a literal dirt floor.
Not that CHMA has grew up there at a young age.
He and his older brother Arean were sent to live with their grandmother.
When it became apparent that their teacher parents couldn't afford to feed them
still. That doesn't mean Chavez's early. Life was all hard knocks and misery.
As a boy,
he was semi-famous around the outskirts of Barrs small city on the edge of
Venezuela's vast grasslands for his ability to play baseball.
This was the era of guys like nester Lago Chavez,
the Venezuelan pitcher who made it all the way to the San Francisco giants and
Hugo was determined to follow in his footsteps,
but baseball wasn't the only influence floating around BES. At that time,
during the 1960s and seventies,
Venezuela had to deal with a handful of communist insurgencies.
While these orange groups weren't a patch on Columbia's park or Peru shining
path, they were still a fact of life.
It said that the teenage Chavez was intrigued by the gorillas who roams the
nearby countryside, even going so far as to read the works of Karl marks still,
that was all just background to his current love affair. With baseball age,
17 Chavez left BARR essences enrolled the military academy in Caracas,
hit her there, the best baseball coaches and plans to train up,
then drop out as soon as he was good enough to play in the leagues.
But while his pitching might have been good for barriers,
it wasn't good enough for Caracas. At some point,
the young boy from the depo home was forced to abandon his baseball dreams.
And that was how Hugo Chavez found himself stuck on a military track.
He had no interest in following with a yearning fame that could never be
fulfilled.
He graduat hated in 1975 at the bottom of his class immediately after he
joins the army and was packed after fighter MAED surgeon group in rural Anne
Swee to say this was depressing would be like saying Shula's list is a
joyful, sad shears, hated his time in the army.
He hated being in the middle of nowhere.
He hated the gorillas and he hated the human rights abuses.
His unit committed come 1977.
He felt he had more in common with the gorillas than the army.
And he was on the verge of quitting.
When his older brother dropped an unexpected bombshell by now,
AAN was a radical university professor,
but no one had realized quite how radical in secret.
Ian had been building links with the communist and surgeons.
When he heard about his brothers worries,
he offered to arrange a meeting not long after hug go Chavez.
Finally met Douglas Bravo despite having a name that sounds like military code
for the letters D and B Douglas Bravo was in reality,
a former gorilla now preaching the use of Venezuela's oil wealth to build a
socialist utopia together. He and Chavez formed the Bavarian movement.
200 secret cell within the military dedicated to overthrowing the government
when the time came. Luckily for them that time was just around the corner.
We're gonna pause an and take a quick history lesson. Now,
one that will hopefully explain why a failed baseball player succeeded at taking
over Venezuela to do that. We need to focus on two vital things in the country,
politics and oil.
The discovery of black gold in Venezuela took place in 1922.
That year a well in the America IBO basin suddenly began to gush a hundred
hundred thousand barrels a day.
It was the start of a process that would eventually lead to Venezuela.
Having the largest proven oil reserves on earth.
It was also the start of a dangerously lopsided economy.
The damage really began in 1943. When the military rulers signed a law,
forcing all foreign oil companies to hand over a huge of their profits.
The revenue this generated was so vast that the government felt no need to
further diversify the economy.
And that would leave Venezuela very vulnerable to price fluctuations in oil,
but a Petro economy alone does not make an unstable state.
No that took both oil mania and some very unwise decisions taken at the top
in 1958,
opposition leader Romulo betting court became president's ending military rule
known as the father of Venezuelan democracy.
Betting Inor had a lot going for him,
but he was also operating in a time when Latin America was very unstable across
the border. Columbia was just emerging from something known as Lavia Valencia,
a decade of undeclared civil war between the liberal and conservative parties
that had killed over 150,000 needing to keep Venezuela's parties from each
other's throats, Bedor established the Punte, a GMO power sharing, packed,
keeping the main parties perpetually in office.
The Punte a GMO was great in that it led to stability,
but less great in that it concentrated all power in the hands of a very
narrow Europeanized elite belonging to one of two parties.
As a result, if things ever went wrong,
the people would know exactly who to blame.
The good times reached their peak in the 1970s.
After the Arab oil embargo led to a surge demand for Venezuelan crude in
1975, then president Carlos, Andrea Perez, nationalized oil production.
And it seems as if the money would never stop rolling in,
but that's the trouble with a non diversified economy.
All it takes is a single black Swan events and everything can come crashing
down. Fittingly Venezuela's blacks.
One took the form of oil prices in 1981,
a so-called oil glut caused a global price crash,
this kneecap to the Venezuelan economy. But by 1989, the country was in crisis.
President Perez took a loan from the IMF promising to end food and fuel
subsidies as a precondition it's at this point that the other bird came home to
roo thanks to the pun VI GSMO Venezuela's elites were now so totally removed
from their struggling countrymen that they didn't realize they needed the food
subsidies to survive. So when the government suddenly took those subsidies away,
well, let's just say that the masses didn't take kindly to it.
The Cara Caso erupted on February the 27th,
1989 in a week long orgy of rot in Caracas. It devastated the city.
Although the government managed to retake the streets, they did.
So at a great cost by one estimate security forces killed around 3000.
Ratts in the aftermath.
A huge anger began to swell against the elites against the punt of GSMO in the
military. This anger found an outlet from that year,
Hugo Chave and Douglas Bravo had no problem recruiting soldiers into their
revolutionary sell. By the time the nineties got underway,
they had their own private army
On February the fourth, 1992,
regular broadcasts on Venezuelan TV were interrupted by breaking news report.
A military co was underway as tanks rolled up the streets of the presidential
palace stories poured in of armed units,
seizing the cities of Mar IBO and Valencia. For a moment,
it really looks like the plotters would take power, but only for a moment.
Somehow president Perez managed to escape capture.
He went on TV and called for people to defy the plotters.
Shortly after the tanks stopped their assaults.
The leader of the co cuts deal to stand down provided.
He was allowed to go on live TV and ask his followers to lay down their arms.
That very nice Venezuela got its first glimpse of hug go.
Despite having just led a failed CU Chavez seemed calm before the cameras even
amused in a short speech, he declared
The key words there were for now or a horror in Spanish
coming this confidence officer,
the soldier who looks not like the European eyes deletes,
but like the mixed heritage mass of Venezuelans.
Those two words did not sound empty.
They actually sounded like a promise in the aftermath of the coup Chavez was
thrown in prison, but he wouldn't be there long.
The coup attempts had come a time when memories of the car car,
as they were still fresh.
When the ruling classes were trusted about as much as your trust,
a babysitting service run by Jared Fogal inves Venezuelans,
didn't see a Renegade army officer. They saw a hope for their future. Next year,
1993, president Barez was impeached for embezzlements and removed from office.
When Rafa Aldera took office in 1990,
he issued a blanket pardon to the co plotters on Israeli.
Shez became a celebrity.
The soldier who'd taken a stand against corrupt Perez during a 100 day
tour. Venezuela,
the former plotter met thousands of ordinary people and everywhere he went,
he took his promise. Poor a horror things were bad,
but only for now. He seemed to be saying, trust me,
new possibilities will arise again.
By the time the 1998 elections rolled around Chavez was the most popular man in
the country. Founding a party known as the movement of the fifth Republic.
He ran for presidents and it was perfect timing.
Chavez painted himself as someone neither left nor right.
Simply an outsider who would drain the swamping car and shake up the
Mons two party system that ignored ordinary voters.
The establishment played right into his hands,
putting up a foreign educated candidate who might as well have campaigned from a
literal ivory tower. The results were unambiguous on December the sixth,
1998.
Chavez won the presidency carrying 56% of the vote on February the second, 1999.
He was inaugurated on a platform of sweeping change.
The triumph of the failed baseball star had dreamed of when he launched his coup
just seven years earlier was finally here. Poor horror was gone.
It was Mely a horror.
The time was now no one watching Chavez's nor ion on TV could have guessed it.
But a historic moment had just taken place.
When Hugo Chavez finally left office in the back of a hears,
he would leave behind a country that had changed forever.
Now you might not have to worry about someone plotting a cue against you,
but you might have to worry about people stealing your data online. Look,
if you are buying things online and you're not in a secure wifi spot,
you really should be using a VPN.
And that's where today's sponsor Nord VPN comes in.
Now I know it's tempting not to bother just sort of hope for the best,
but really those stories you hear about online, about people having the,
a data stone and they really do happen and you don't wanna make it easy for that
to happen to you whenever I'm browsing on unsecured wifi,
I just keep a VPN on in the backgrounds all the time.
So I don't have to worry about anyone stealing my data,
but it's not just about security.
You can also use it to change the country you appear to be in.
So you can get content that might normally only be available in specific
geographic locations. Nord VPNs also super fast.
So watching a video is a breeze. There's no lag whatsoever.
If you've ever thought VPNs were slow. Well,
that's not the case with Nord VPN and you can use it on all of your devices.
Very easily, Android Chrome windows, Linux,
and on six different devices with just one account. Also,
there are no logs kept at all.
Unlike companies based in the EU or the us nor VPN is over in Panama.
So they just don't have to keep any logs,
which is obviously great for your privacy.
Start protecting your internet experience today, go to Nord,
vpn.com/biographics and use MyCode.
Biographics 70% off a three year plan and an extra month for free
protect yourself online today. And let's get back to it.
When Chaz took office,
he was more popular than any of today's populist could dream of being across
1999 as approved of rating hovered around a staggering 80%.
He was helped by Aran of reforms, including planned Boulevard,
2000 a kind of Venezuela new deal that poured money into infrastructure spending
and building affordable homes.
But this populism masked deeper machinations as president
Chavez,
was able to call a referen and Monterey writing the constitution with people
still at Venezuela's elites.
He won by a wide margin in the vote deciding who would do the rewriting Chavez
again, carried the day.
The result was a constitution rewritten to give the president six year times and
allow immediate reelection. It also abolished the Senate,
enforced every elected official to run again for office in two,
or lose their seats. When Chavez put this to referendum on the 15th of December,
he won again.
It was the classical political trick of ramming through major changes.
While you still have that honeymoon glow before people start to seriously
question your motivations. And it works when the mega election was held in July,
2000 showers won a new year term and a new national assembly was returned
that held a pro Chavez majority not long after the Supreme court was quietly
stuffed with pro Chavez judges, but was Chavez was consolidating.
His power life in Venezuela was stubbornly refusing to improve.
In 1999, the economy had shrunk by 7%.
The problems that had led to Chavez's own 1992 co still hadn't gone away
and Chavez.
Wasn't the only former officer willing to change the leadership through force
early warning signs came in 2001 when Chavez unveiled a package of executive
decreased designed to wildly redistribute land and wealth in Venezuela,
that turns the business community ends the upper classes against him.
Then he started cozying up to fed dark Castro's Cuba alienating the middle class
come 2002 Chavez. His support was tanking.
No one even seemed to be sure who is ruling for apart from himself.
It was at this point,
our president did something very stupid that year Chavez announced moves that
we'd effectively place the state oil company under the control of his own party.
The reaction was swift and it was violence on April the 11th million,
a million people marched on the president's palace in Caracas to protest.
Instead, they were met by Chavez's oil gunman who opened fire.
It was the Cara Hasso all over again.
And an unknown number of people died that same day.
The military removed Hugo Chavez from power. So you're not an idiot.
You can see that this video still has about half of its run time left.
So the question therefore is, well, how did Hugo Chavez survive?
The coup the answer sheer luck, the same day Chavez was arrested.
The military installed businessman,
Pedro Carmona as head of an interim government,
but Carona seems to have mistaken this for a blank check and immediately
suspended the constitution and dissolved the government in response,
the military appears to have been like, ah, no,
this guy's even crazier than the last guy.
Therefore they just hit the undue button.
Camona was himself deposed and Chavez returns.
The president's palaces by the very army that had arrested him after Amere 47
hours, Yugo Chavez was back in control. At first,
he was contrite promising more compromise in the future accepting that he had
gone too far, but this is Chavez.
Remember the guy of P horror,
all it learns from the 2002 co was that the time wasn't ripe to launch his
complete takeover of the government, but when the time came,
he would be more than ready.
The moments the Kaku collapsed, Venezuela became a country. Bitterly divided,
do camps.
Those who loved Chavez and those who spat at the very mention of his name.
Initially the second camp was biggest.
Chavez was just too openly craving power for power's sake,
even fired striking workers who opposed him and replaced them with non-union
labor move way more capitalist, roaders,
and socialist revolutionary,
but then fi Castro had a quiet word in Chave and everything changed.
The Bavarian missions named after independence era,
Simon BVA were simple in their genius government bodies funded by rising all
prices were charged with going into the slums of Caracas and improving life for
the poor. There were adult literacy programs, free community healthcare,
subsidized food banks, free houses for the deed tears. Well, okay.
You might be thinking,
but that's just the very poorest that surely can't be enough voters to keep
Chavez in power. Right. But the thing is, yeah, there were enough of them.
Remember the booms times under the pun over G when all that all money came
rolling in. Well, it had only come rolling in for those at the very top.
By the time Chavez took power, a full 50% of Venezuelans were living in poverty,
ignored and forgotten by the elites with the Bavarian missions,
someone was finally paying attention to them.
And it's here that we can see one of the fascinating contradictions of Hugo
Chave. As on the one hands, the missions, they were clearly cynical,
organized to get masses of voters on his site. But on the other hands,
the missions did really work. Millions were lifted out of poverty.
Millions were given opportunities that long been denied to them.
Imagine for a moment that you were AAC, a slum dweller,
who'd seen her lifestyle remain resolutely third world,
even as the elites enjoyed unparalleled luxury.
Now imagine a government suddenly coming along,
that gets rid of your dirt floor that can give you drinking water that can give
your son an education, which you really refused to vote for.
The man who gave you all of this.
The popularity boost from the missions allows Chavez to survive a 2004 recall
referendum by 2005,
he was popular enough that he launched a program of land appropriations aimed at
large estate. That same year laws were passed effectively,
ending media freedom come 2006. The opposition was boycoting elections.
So pro Chavez's politicians effectively won every seat going and Chavez
himself won reelection as president Chavez's last great move that year was
found the United socialist party of Venezuela effectively merging nearly all the
countries left wing parties with his own.
The president now had a strangle hold on power in Carras.
His opponents were down the masses in love with him,
and all voices of moderation were silenced.
He was effectively a God,
a man upon whose shoulders or power in his nation rested.
And it's at this point, that things begin to get a little weird.
One of the interesting things about Chavez,
we can only see with hindsight is that the prefigured to days populists like
many of those running the world now Chavez, scorned, normal media channels.
Instead preferring to communicate directly with his followers.
He was obsessed with touring the country, giving speeches that were rambling,
folksy, unscripted, and often fantastically vindictive.
He developed a way with insults once calling George W. Bush more,
more dangerous than a monkey with a razor blade.
English Akey Mr. D.
He'd dabbled in conspiracy theories,
speculating to enrapture audiences that the moon landings were faked that secret
us super weapons caused earthquakes.
It was a technique we're all too familiar with in the presence,
the use of bombast and taboo,
breaking to distract attention from the seriously evil crap that you're actually
up to. But while today's populist S of Hugo Chavez,
the original was just light years beyond anything. Donald Trump, Boris Johnson,
or even Richard ago,
Duterte could dream of by the late two thousands Chavez had so effectively
become the focal point of Venezuelan governance that he was followed everywhere
by cameras.
His lust off the cuff remarks translated into instant policy as if he were some
sort of medieval European king.
That was,
is the time he set the nation's clocks back half an hour on a whi more the time
he nearly declared war on Columbia, live on air.
We're not making laws up on the fly.
He was launching into seven hour rents on his weekly show.
Allo Presidente covering everything from whiskey to cosmetic surgery.
It's tempting to think that post 2006 Chavez simply lost it so that he was Mely
another GIA weirdo Athar who finally let his weirdness come out.
But there is another view. One summed up by the former editor of the news site,
Caracas Chronicles in Venezuela.
These outbreaks of weird had a different meaning is visible displays of Chavez's
untouchability.
There's an inevitable creepiness to a society where the leader never pays a
political price for what he says,
no matter how plainly crazy or illegal it may be. In other words,
Chavez only acted so crazy because he knew he could get away with it.
And he wanted you to know that he could get away with it,
despite all the outward trappings of a G Daffy star dictatorship, though,
we should be careful to note that Chavez wasn't actually a dictator,
at least not in the traditional sense. In his 14 years in office,
he never once rigged an election.
He won nearly every vote he took part in and he won it fair and square.
On the other hand, when he did lose, he found,
let's say creative ways around the result in 2007, for example, Chavez,
narrowly lost a referendum on great expanding his powers.
The next day billboards appeared around Caracas with the slogan PRA horror.
It was a promise one that Chavez followed through on over the next three years.
All the failed referendums provisions were passed one way or another either by
breaking them up and holding separate referendums or by making the national
assembly pass laws or by using executive orders by I 2010 Chavez had
everything had asked voters for back in 2007. So yeah,
Chavez may never have become a dictator in the literal sense,
but nor was he a Democrat, more,
a strong man who used democracy to do undemocratic things come
2010 Chavez had secured the constitutional right to keep running for new you
presidential terms indefinitely.
Did anyone watching Venezuela at the time?
It seems like the 56 year old Chavez could conceivably keep ruling for another
three decades. Little.
Did anyone know that it'd be gone in barely a 10th of that time?
The first signs of the honor that would kill Hugo Chavez appeared in June of
2011. That month,
our Presidente was forced to cancel a meeting of Latin American leaders in
flight to Cuba for emergency surgery.
No long after he informed his public that had been diagnosed with cancer.
At first,
it seemed that treatments in Cuba were a success come 2012 Chavez was still
feeling strong enough to run in presidential elections and when a third term,
but it just a smoke screen, deep down Chavez knew what was happening.
And he began to make preparations on October the 11th, 2012,
Chavez abruptly appointed former bus driver,
Nicholas Maduro as his vice president Maduro had been in government for a while,
but he was an outsider to its real circles of power and singularly
uncharismatic boot it's been Chavez,
appointed him because he was the most dogmatic,
but most likely to carry on the Bavarian revolution if something were to happen
to Chavez, not long after it did in January,
2013 Chavez was so well that he missed his own inauguration leading to confusion
as to whether he was still even legally president.
But that pretty soon became AOT point on March. The fifth, 2013,
Hugo Chavez died of cancer less than a month later,
a special election was held to decide who would replace our Presidente after 14
years, despite the backing of all the media. And despite the Goodwill,
the masses still felt towards Chavez his vice president, Neil as Maduro,
barely squeaked home with him,
50.6% of the vote yet squeak home. He did.
And the rest is just so much painful history today.
It's easy to look at the mess that is Venezuela and judge Hugo Chavez harshly.
In many ways,
his revolution really was a catastrophe crime sought under his watch turning
Caracas from a relatively safe city into one of the most D capitals on
earth.
The economy too was as neglected as during the Punte GSMO like the elites before
him Chavez simply took the oil money without thinking,
leaving behind an economy.
So dangerously unbalanced that even basic food staffs,
Venezuela could produce domestically had to be imported.
He acted up huge debt with China, as he chased the middle classes away,
hundreds of thousands moved abroad, taking their business skills with them.
So yes,
there are a whole bunch of reasons you can blame modern Venezuela on Chavez's
rule. Many reasons why you can see his legacy as nothing but poison,
but that's not the whole picture for the awful stuff. Hugo Chavez did.
It's worth remembering one salient fact. The people really did love him.
Not in the way north Koreans are forced to love Kim Jon UN gunpoint,
but a real deep love that came from Chavez.
Being the only man to ever listen to them and Chavez earned this love.
He lifted millions out of poverty.
He gave the forgotten masses paths to education means to improve their lives in
ways that never dreams in another time with a different personality,
Hugo Chavez could have been remembered as Venezuela's Franklin D Roosevelt,
the first president to speak for the common man. Sadly,
we don't live in that time and Chavez didn't have a better personality.
What he did have though, was an undeniably historic impact.
If history is simply the story of men and women who changed the world around
them,
then Hugo Chavez will always remain one of Venezuela's most important chapters
for better and for worse,
he changed his nation more profoundly than anyone likely will again for
centuries. So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do smash that like button below, do not forget to subscribe. Also,
please do support this show by supporting our fantastic sponsor Nord VPN link
below. And thank you for watching.
I.